---
layout: ../../layouts/Post.astro
slug: "1"
title: "The most important attribute for developers | Tom Shaw"
heading: "The most important attribute for developers"
description: "spoiler: it's empathy!"
date: "2023-05-24"
---
Something I’ve found during my time working as a developer in the industry is that many developers might be missing a really important “skill” — or, more accurately, a characteristic — which is **empathy**.

In my industrial placement as a frontend developer at HMRC, I worked on the design system that oversees all the components used across HMRC services. To give some context, this includes components like:

- **Service Timeout**
- **File Upload**
- **Add to List**

You can see the entire design system [here](https://design.tax.service.gov.uk/). 

It quickly became apparent to me: **oh wow, the entire country (and sometimes beyond) is our “customer.”** When this is the case, you really can’t assume anything. You don’t know what device your user is using, or what browser they have, or how old they are. You don’t know whether they’ve ever used a computer before.

This revelation is initially shocking, and then you’re introduced to the **‘Empathy Lab.’** Here in the Newcastle office, there’s a room designed to simulate the accessibility needs of our users. It includes tools like:

- Glasses to simulate short-sightedness and blindness (or even a blindfold, which works just as well).
- Tools to simulate dizziness caused by vertigo.
- And more.

Try this for yourself: visit your favorite website, turn on your screen reader, close your eyes, and navigate it for 5 minutes. Now imagine doing that for a lifetime.

With all of this in mind, **empathy stands out to me as a key motivator for developers**, as well as an important trait that sets us apart. If you feel for your user, you will build for your user.

I hope this perspective encourages you to think differently the next time you’re tempted to put off learning about ARIA roles (guilty as charged). 

Thank you for reading!
